## Git 201: Branches

* Why?
  * want to save your work but don't want to edit the main branch with unfinished or experimental changes
  * parallel lines of development
  * feature branches
  * experimental branches
  * saving your work vs publishing your work
  * scenario - you need to switch tasks, maybe you were working on a feature, and then your boss wanted you to stop everything an fix a production bug instead
* how git stores commits
  * each commit is defined in terms of the commit from which it was modified. You can conceptualize it as a record of what changed, or a delta.
  * you can have multiple lines of development by creating separate branches
* current working branch - git status will tell you what branch you are on
* the default branch is master. You are always working on some branch.
* use git status a lot and read what it says. It will tell you what's going on and a lot of times give you instructions as to what to do next.
* GitHub: pull requests
  * like a poke on a social network
  * very useful as a code review tool, because you can write comments, even on individual lines of code

## How to create and checkout a branch

git checkout -b my-branch

Which will create my-branch and also check it out at the same time.

## How to see what branch you are on

git status

The first thing git status tells you is what branch you are on. The first line should look like:

On branch my-branch

When in doubt, always be using `git status`.

## How to checkout (or switch to) a branch

git checkout my-branch

## How to merge a branch

When you merge, you are merging the changes from one branch into another branch. To do this, first checkout the branch you want to merge into, often this is the master branch:

git checkout master

Now, do `git status` to make sure you are indeed on the master branch. Then to merge my-branch into master:

git merge my-branch

That's it! Now do `git status` again to check the status. And do `git log` to see that the changes from my-branch are in master.

### Pull Requests

How to make a pull request on GitHub:

1. Go to the project page of the project you want to contribute to.
2. Click the "Fork" button to fork the project.
3. Clone your own fork of the project to a repository your local machine.
4. Make a branch in your local repository: `git checkout -b my-cool-feature`
5. Make commits.
6. Push the changes up to your fork: `git push -u origin my-cool-feature`
7. Go to the page for your fork and create new pull request based on the my-cool-feature branch. Write detailed comments and explain why this feature is worthwhile.

### Exercises

#### One: Basic branching

As you are doing this exercise, after each step, type: `git status` and read the status.

1. make a branch and check it out: `git checkout my-cool-branch`
2. make some commits on that branch: `git commit`
3. look at the history on that branch: `git log`
4. check the difference between my-cool-branch - what you are current on - and master: `git diff master`
5. checkout the master branch again: `git checkout master`
6. merge the new branch: `git merge my-cool-branch`
7. look at the git log of master: `git log`
8. check the difference between master - what you are current on - and my-cool-branch: `git diff my-cool-branch`. There should be no difference, in which case there will be no output.

#### Two: Switching Tasks

As you are doing this exercise, after each step, type: `git status` and read the status.

1. checkout the branch again: `git checkout my-cool-branch`
2. make more commits: `git commit`
3. checkout the master: `git checkout master`
4. make another branch and check it out: `git checkout -b another-branch`
5. make commits to that branch: `git commit`
6. checkout (go back to) master: `git checkout master`
7. merge the second branch: `git merge another-branch`
8. merge first branch: `git merge my-cool-branch`
9. look at the git log: `git log`

### Three: Pull Requests

Make a pull request. See https://github.com/airportyh/git-demo-2 for instructions.
